>> Jason Pamental: This is that
sample page using Plex, which is
a beautiful set of typefaces that IBM
developed for their own identity recently.
And they open-sourced all of it, so
you can actually go use them if you want.
But this is a quick example of
dealing with the loading process well,
so watch what happens here.
I'm toggling the web fonts on and off.
Now, there's a little bit of jumpiness
down here with the line length change,
just at the bottom here.
But if this were even
any smaller a screen,
you wouldn't really see
much reflow at all.
So what I'm doing is I'm toggling those
wf-active and inactive classes, and
I'll open up the web inspector so
you can see what that actually looks
like.
>> Jason Pamental: So
here's the CSS on the h1
with the web fonts on.
You see that it's got just
the normal styles there.
And when I toggle them off,
when the wf-inactive class is present,
notice it's calling Georgia,
it's not calling Plex Serif.
And then it's got a letter
spacing of -5 pixels.
And watch what happens when I
turn that letter spacing off.
See how much things sort of jump around?
Now, that might not be a big deal with
this view, but what if the window
were just a little bit narrower, and
that spacing was coming and going?
It could actually be enough
to force that to wrap.
Now I won't be able to show you.
>> Jason Pamental: Of course
not.
>> Jason Pamental: Best laid plans.
Well, we do the same thing with
the h2 where there's actually
a fairly significant jump.
>> Jason Pamental: You see that
stuff kinda moves around quite a bit more
when the correction is there or not.
It's even more prevalent
when we look here,
where we have letter spacing and
font size changes.
So see how different it is when you
don't have the correction in place.
So, this took me all of about 10 or
15 minutes to add that
fallback code in there.
And now the experience is
much more seamless for
people during that loading process where
things aren't really moving around.
And really, one of the only reason is
you see the jump there is I still have
a transition in the CSS.
If I turned that off,
then it would actually be pretty
instant.
>> Jason Pamental: And
so the way that ends up looking,
>> Jason Pamental: Is I
just add that little declaration
right after the paragraph stuff.
So if we go over, and I'm just
gonna open this up quickly in Code.
I don't wanna get too
sidetracked with that just yet.
>> Jason Pamental: There we go.
So we have the declaration for
the paragraph, font-size and line-height.
And then when .wf-inactive is present, I
just change the font-size and line-height.
So I just tweak those little values.
If you add the declaration, and
then look at it in the browser,
that's why I added that
little toggle button.
And that's just a little chunk of code
you could drop in any page template.
It's all self contained.
And you can use that to kind of
turn the web fonts on and off and
tweak those values until
things aren't moving around.
Won't take you really all that long to do.
You really only have to do it once,
and it will usually do enough for
any other content that
you'll see on your site.
So really does help kind of
mitigate that loading process.
And should those web fonts never load,
they're still going
to get that experience, because
the JavaScript is inline in the page.
So the class is going to get added.
I mean, that's the biggest thing.
You don't have to worry about
the JavaScript not being delivered.
It's actually in line in the page, so that
way you know the class will get added.
And if you have your CSS set up correctly,
even devices that don't understand web
fonts for whatever reason are still going
to get a good experience.
>> Jason Pamental: Any questions on
the stuff that I've covered so far?
>> Student: And
so that wf-inactive value,
that's been in there since 2010.
>> Jason Pamental: So
2010 is when the first web font
loader was released by Google.
They actually worked on that.
I think it was Google and
Adobe that worked on that together, and
they open sourced it.
So very quickly, Google Web Fonts and
Typekit started to make use of that,
and that's where it first
became a bit of a standard.
Initially, fonts.com put
something similar in place but
they're using a different class name.
And thankfully after a while
they dropped that, and
everybody kind of
standardized on the same one.
So that way we can kind of all write
the CSS, kind of across the board.
So that Google Web Font Loader was
the first open source project.
That's kind of evolved over time.
One of the people that created
that initially was Bram Stein,
who works for Typekit.
He's recently, or more recently,
created Font Face Observer.
I've found that to be the most
performant way of loading stuff.
If you want truly exhaustive
comparisons of font-loading techniques,
follow Zach Leatherman
from the Filament Group.
He has written some incredibly
thorough analysis of
different font loading techniques.
I've tried many of them and I've found
this to be the most reliable and
the easiest to maintain.
So that's really where I went with it.
There are other things that people
do to optimize font performance.
Many of them will stumble over
the licensing with the font itself.
So that's actually something kind
of worth pausing for a moment.
If you are going and getting fonts,
you need to make sure that you have
a proper license to use them on the web.
And that also means that
you can't convert them.
That's almost certainly
a violation of the license.
So getting somebody's desktop fonts and
then going to Font Squirrel and turning
them into a web font, that is not legit.
And you're also going to
get an inferior font,
because those conversion processes
are not optimizing things at all.
There's a ton of work that goes into
making fonts work well on the web.
In most cases,
they're just not that expensive.
>> Jason Pamental: The client,
the organization, whoever you work for,
they can pay a little bit of money.
It might only be a few hundred bucks to
get font files that are in WOFF2 format.
That's really what you want
to be using these days.
You might need to have one or
two other fallback versions,
but WOFF2 is supported basically
in every shipping browser.
It's got the most compression,
and the most feature support.
So generally speaking,
that's what you wanna be looking for.